---
title: Planning a project
author: Fernando Valadares
layout: post
---

Last year ended on a high note with the conclusion of my last project, already [available on arXiv](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.14665.pdf). 

In a few words, we expanded the capabilities of quantum circuits that can be used as building blocks of quantum computers. My team and I achieved the integration of flux-tunable transmons 
to long-lived cavities. Once we are able to tune the transmon frequency within nanoseconds, we can control its interactions with the cavity on real time. This opens up a new world of 
operations in the field of bosonic CQED, in which the cavities are used as storages of information and can benefit from this flexible control.

This project was exceedingly challenging due to the complicated hardware design and fabrication. But also because it was the first time I was put in a position of leading a research project. 
Looking back in time, I see how the results could have been sped up if I had more understanding of project management.

But there is no use dwelling in the past. 2024 is just starting, and I can use these past learnings to plan my next research project. In fact, this sequel is already up and running - my 
colleagues are already working on some preliminary simulations to improve the previous hardware. So, now that I'm coming back from vacations, it is the right time to set
our research goals, rally the team and plan our tasks ahead of time. 

Inspired by this [this blog post](https://www.projectmanager.com/blog/project-management-skills), I want to discuss a few management tasks that I believe will make our team more efficient.
The objective of this post is to reflect on my own experience and set attributions for myself for this year. If you are also a PhD student and also want to learn about management, I hope 
these reflections will be useful for us to learn it together. 

# Table of Contents
* TOC
{:toc}

# Drafting the scope

Every research project needs clear goals. The initial goal of this project is to identify the problems with the hardware we developed last year and create better solutions.

It is difficult to tell in advance _where_ and _how_ we can improve. So the first thing I need to do is a list of all problems we have now, and suggest improvements. Every improvement
comes with a time and effort costs, so I have to identify which of them have the best cost-benefit. 

Once these possible improvements are identified, it is necessary split them down into intermediate goals. For example, improving the coherence times of the transmon involves improving its wiring,
changing its design and running more simulations. These intermediate goals make clear what type of resources I need and delineate the scope of the project.

The final deliverable is, of course, a research paper. Papers usually need more than just reporting a device: we need to find something useful to do with it.

# Planning and establishing milestones

# Forecasting risks

# Tracking performance

# Conclusion
